# Single Instrument Soundtracks

Listen to this: _Third Man Soundtrack_

How does it make you feel?

For me, it makes me feel a little amused, a little befuddled, and very
entranced.

Today, we're talking about soundtracks. But not any soundtracks; we're
going to talk about what I'd call *single instrument soundtracks*.

These aren't soundtracks containing only a single instrument, but more
soundtracks in which a single instrument is the dominating feature.

Why single instrument soundtracks? Well I'd like to argue that they
add **specificity**---a sense of place and voice---to an otherwise
underused element of film, i.e. the soundtrack.

What you just heard comes from *The Third Man*, a film about a man who
comes to post-WWII Vienna to see his friend, Harry Lime, who has
promised him a job, and discovers that his friend has died.

The instrument on the soundtrack is the zither, a rather unique
stringed instrument. Anton Karas, the composer, became rather famous
for this soundtrack.

Let's listen to another part:

_Third Man End Theme_

Notice how this theme is so different? When I listen to this, it feels
melancholy, almost wistful. There's a sad beauty to it.

The zither is doing all of the work. It manages to be both sad and
amusing, tense and relaxed.

Another example is Ry Cooder's work in *Paris, Texas*.

_Paris Texas soundtrack_

His guitar manages to be the central "voice" of the piece. In a film
where so much is left unsaid, the soundtrack manages to fill in the
emotional, if not narrative, parts.

Contrast this to a more traditional soundtrack:

_Little Women Soundtrack_

It's not that this soundtrack is bad. In fact, it's quite good! But it
lacks specificity. There's nothing about the soundtrack that places it
in a specific place or time.

Some filmmakers have attempted to fix this by adding popular
music. And sometimes that can work quite well! Wong Kar-Wai and Martin
Scorsese are examples of two directors who effectively use popular
music:

_Chungking Express_

_Goodfellas_

However, I think there's something to be said about using single
instruments to create this sense of place. It's a little more subtle
in its effect.

But let's back up. What do I mean by sense of place? Let's take two
films:*Stranger Than Fiction* and *The Third Man*. Both a great movies
with great casts and ideas. They were both shot on location in their
respective cities of Chicago and Vienna.

However, The Third Man is unmistakably set in a particular time
(post-WWII) and place (Vienna). The film uses iconic locations such as
the Wiener Riesenrad, the Viennese sewers and the bombed out post-war
ruins. The narrative reflects this zeitgeist in its themes of cynicism
and loss of innocence. And, yes, the soundtrack adds lot of this sense
of place.

Stranger Than Fiction on the other hand, does not have a distinctive
sense of place. I had to look up online to figure out that it was shot
in Chicago. There's nothing that specifically pins the film to the mid
2000's.

Again, both are great films. But I think there's something
fundamentally lasting about The Third Man. Whenever I watch it, it
transports me back to Vienna in 1948. The zither becomes almost like
emotional narration, indicating both the sad and the happy.

# PS

I wanted to write this essay to point out a lovely style of film music
that I believe is heavily underutilized. Far too much of film music
these days is very standard orchestral fare.

Orchestral fare can be quite good for some types of films. For
instance, 2001 A Space Odyssey uses grand, dramatic classical music to
emphasize the grandeur of space:

_2001_

But it's not a great fit for everything and frankly it's used quite
lazily. The great YouTube channel Every Frame A Painting has already
gone over this in depth; a lot of films use common motifs like a high
note played on a stringed instrument to evoke emotion. These motifs
are extremely generic and do not offer a sense of place.
